File        : frontend.txt
Date        : 14-Dec-99
Author      : Â© A.Thoukydides, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2016
Description : Description of the WIMP front-end "!Virtualis".

License     : Virtualise is free software: you can redistribute it and/or
              modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
              published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of
              the License, or (at your option) any later version.

              Virtualise is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
              but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
              MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the
              GNU General Public License for more details.

              You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
              along with Virtualise. If not, see<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.


INTRODUCTION

This file is intended as a reference to all of the features included in the
"!Virtualis" front-end. For a simple introduction read the "tutorial.txt" file.
The front-end supports interactive help; use Acorn's !Help application to
obtain information about the item under the mouse pointer.


STARTING THE PROGRAM

Start the front-end by simply double-clicking SELECT on the "!Virtualis" icon
in a directory viewer. After a short delay the application icon will appear
on the icon-bar.


THE ICON BAR

Clicking MENU on the icon which appears on the iconbar opens the main program
menu which offers the following options:

    Info            Moving over the sub-menu arrow displays a standard
                    program information window. The version number should be
                    the same as the version of the Virtualise module being
                    used.
                    
    List areas...   This opens up a window giving details of all the dynamic
                    areas in the machine, and allow various operations to be
                    performed.

    Page faults...  This opens up a window showing the number of page faults
                    which have been serviced classified according to the type
                    of instruction which generated the exception.
                    
    Configure...    This opens up a dialogue box which allows the Virtualise
                    module to be configured.

    Automatic...    This opens up a window listing the dynamic area names for
                    which virtual memory will automatically be enabled when
                    they are next created.

    Tasks...        This opens up a window listing the current WIMP tasks,
                    allowing specified tasks to be suspended and swapped to
                    disc.
                    
    Quit            Quits the front-end program. The module is not affected.

These options can be assigned to SELECT and ADJUST clicks on the iconbar
icon.


DYNAMIC AREA LIST WINDOW

The dynamic area list window can be opened by either selecting the
"List areas..." option from the icon-bar menu.

The window which is opened displays details of all the dynamic areas which
exist in the computer. This list is updated once per second on WIMP
null-polls. Areas with numbers under 256 (those which are not listed as
dynamic areas in the Taskmanager) are shaded. The columns of details are:

    Name            The name of the dynamic area as displayed by the
                    TaskManager or returned by OS_DynamicArea 2.
                    
    Number          The dynamic area number as used with OS_DynamicArea,
                    OS_ReadDynamicArea and OS_ChangeDynamicArea.
                    
    Maximum         The maximum size (reserved logical address space) of the
                    dynamic area.
                    
    Logical         The current logical size of the area, i.e. how much
                    memory the user of the area thinks is being used.
                    
    Physical        The current physical size of the area, i.e. how much real
                    memory is being used to support accesses to area. If the
                    area has not got virtual memory enabled then it will be
                    the same as the logical size.
                    
    VM              An indicator of whether virtual memory is enabled for the
                    area.

Unshaded areas may be selected by clicking with SELECT and ADJUST in the
usual manner. Clicking Menu opens a menu that allows various operations to be
performed. The options offered are:

    Virtualise      Either enable or disable virtual memory for all of
                    the selected dynamic areas. If any of the selected
                    areas have virtual memory already enabled then a tick
                    appears next to this item. This option is shaded if no
                    areas are selected.
    
    Delete area...  Remove the selected dynamic areas. This option is shaded
                    if no areas are selected. A dialogue box is opened to
                    confirm the deletion.

    Show map...     This opens a window for each selecting area showing the
                    status of all the pages of memory within the areas.
                    Double-clicking SELECT on a dynamic area entry has the
                    same effect.
    
    Select all      This selects all of the dynamic areas.
    
    Clear selection This deselects any areas which are selected.

The Virtualise and Remove options should obviously be used with care; it is
very easy to crash the computer if these are used carelessly.

If an application is dragged into the list window the "Modify application"
dialogue box is opened. This is described in the next section.

MODIFY APPLICATION DIALOGUE

This allows the application to be modified so that it always uses virtual
memory when it is run. A backup of the application should be made before
using this option.

The top of the window shows which application will be altered. The centre of
the window controls the operation to perform:

    Enable virtual memory by default
    
                    This option modifies the !Run file of the application to
                    automatically enable virtual memory for the dynamic areas
                    which are selected within the dynamic area list window.
                    These should be the dynamic areas that are used by the
                    application being modified. This will take effect the next
                    time that the application is started. This option also
                    copies the Virtualise module into the
                    "!Boot.Choices.Boot.PreDesk" directory to ensure that it
                    is always loaded.
    
    Size limit      This is the maximum size that will be set for the
                    selected dynamic areas.
    
    Restore original !Run file
    
                    This attempts to restore the application to the state it
                    was in before it was modified. Due to the way in which
                    this operates it may not take effect until the next time
                    the computer is reset.

    Uninstall module
    
                    Selecting this option removes the Virtualise module from
                    the boot sequence if it was previously installed by the
                    enable virtual memory option.

At the bottom of the window are two action buttons:

    Cancel          Clicking on this icon aborts the modification, leaving
                    the application unchanged. Pressing Escape has the same
                    effect.
    
    OK              Clicking on this icon performs the selected modification.
                    It is also possible to press Return to have the same
                    effect.


PAGE STATUS WINDOW

Any number of page status windows may be opened. The main part of the window
at the top contains a square for each page of memory within the dynamic area.
The colour of the square indicates the state of that page. Clicking MENU
within the window opens a menu:

    Key...          A window showing the meaning of the different colours.

    Zoom            A list of the possible scales at which the status display
                    can be shown.

The lower part of the window has an Update button which takes a new snapshot
of the state of the dynamic area. Also shown is the dynamic area number and
name.

Note that the access count is only meaningful if the NFU page replacement
policy is configured.


CONFIGURATION WINDOW

The configuration window is split into two areas. The scrollable area on the
left displays all of the options that may be controlled. The area on the
right contains three buttons:

    Save            Save the values shown. These values will be used by both
                    the Virtualise module and the "!Virtualis" front-end each
                    time they are started in the future.
    
    Read current    Reads the current settings from the Virtualise module.
                    The numerical values are rounded down to 0.1MB multiples
                    before being displayed.
    
    Set new         Sets the values shown in the window. The settings are
                    then read back and window updated.

If the Virtualise module is not loaded the last two buttons will produce an
error message.

The section of the scrollable area entitled "Memory usage" shows each of the
values which can be set using Virtualise_Configure, and one extra that can be
set using Virtualise_UserConfigure. Note that these values can only be
specified to the nearest 0.1MB due to the way in which the Toolbox system
handles number range gadgets. The items are:

    Claim up to     The amount of real memory to claim automatically for the
                    virtual memory pool if it could be useful.

    Keep below      The amount of real memory to keep even if other
                    applications require more memory than is available.
    
    Leave free      The minimum amount of memory to leave free when the size
                    of the virtual memory pool is adjusted.
    
    Size limit      The amount of logical address space reserved for dynamic
                    areas if -1 is specified as the maximum size when they
                    are created.

The second section of the scrollable area entitled "Disc usage" controls the
usage of disc space for swap files. The current version only has a single
item:

    Leave free      The amount of disc space to leave free when a swap file
                    is either created or enlarged. This values may sometimes
                    be exceeded due to the way in which disc space is
                    allocated.

The next section of the scrollable area entitled "Swap file directory" allows
the directory used for storing swap files to be set. This sets the system
variable Virtualise$SwapDir as a macro, so system variables (such as
<Wimp$ScrapDir>) may be included. There are three ways of setting the
directory: dragging the directory icon to a directory window, dragging a file
or directory icon into the configuration window, or by typing the required
pathname into the writable icon. Note that a change to the swap file
directory only affects swap files created after the change has been made;
existing swap files are not moved.

This section of the window also conatins an option button. If the option is
selected then the swap file directory will be purged each time the Virtualise
module is loaded. This will delete any swap files that have been left from
previous uses, and can prevent the disc being filled with unused files.

The next section of the scrollable area entitled "Page replacement policy"
sets the algorithm used to select pages to swap to disc. The current options
are:

    NFU             Not frequently used. This chooses the page that has been
                    accessed the least frequently.
    
    FIFO            First-in, first-out. Pages are swapped out in the order
                    they were originally swapped in. In other words this
                    chooses the oldest page.
    
    Random          A page is chosen at random, irrespective of how recently
                    or frequently it has been used.

There are also two option buttons which control whether pages are read and
written individually or grouped into larger file operations (which should
be faster).

The next section of the scrollable area entitled "Load module" controls
whether the Virtualise module is loaded within the !Boot sequence. The
options are:

    In !Boot sequence
    
                    When this option is selected, the Virtualise module will
                    be placed into the "!Boot.Choices.Boot.PreDesk" directory
                    to ensure that it is always loaded.
    
    When !Virtualis is run
    
                    When this option is selected, any copy of Virtualise in
                    the "!Boot.Choices.Boot.PreDesk" directory will be
                    deleted. The module will then only be loaded when the
                    !Virtualis front-end is run.

The final section of the scrollable area entitled "Iconbar clicks" allows
actions to be assigned to SELECT and ADJUST clicks on the iconbar icon. The
options are the same as those available from the iconbar icon menu.


PAGE FAULTS WINDOW

The "Number of page faults" window is opened by selecting the
"Page faults..." option from the icon-bar menu. The window displays the
numbers of virtual memory page faults which were generated by different
classes of instruction since the module was loaded.

Note that page faults generated by floating point processor instructions will
only be listed under "Coprocessor data transfer" if a real floating point
unit is being used. If Acorn's Floating Point Emulator is being used then it
will be an instruction within the emulator code which actually generates the
exception.


AUTOMATIC VIRTUAL MEMORY WINDOW

The automatic virtual memory list window is opened by selecting the
"Automatic..." option from the icon-bar menu.

The window which is opened lists the names of the dynamic areas for which
virtual memory will be enabled by default. This operates by setting system
variables as described in the "Module" file. This list is updated once per
second on WIMP null-polls. The columns of details are:

    Name            The name of the dynamic area as displayed by the
                    TaskManager or returned by OS_DynamicArea 2. If a
                    system variable corresponding to an unknown dynamic
                    area then the capitalisation and special characters
                    may not be exactly the same as the actual dynamic area
                    name.

    Size limit      The maximum size (reserved logical address space) that
                    should be allocated for the dynamic area if no limit is
                    specified by the program that creates it.

Dynamic area names may be selected by clicking with SELECT and ADJUST in the
usual manner. Clicking Menu opens a menu that allows various operations to be
performed. The options offered are:

    Size limit
    
    Add area        The sub-menu lists all the names of dynamic areas that
                    have been seen by the "!Virtualis" front-end. Select
                    the name of a dynamic area to add it to the list. It is
                    initially added with a size limit of 256MB. The list of
                    known dynamic areas is saved betweed sessions.
    
    Remove area     Remove the selected dynamic area names from the list.
                    This also unsets the corresponding system variables.
    
    Save            Save a list of the current settings.  This option also
                    copies the Virtualise module into the
                    "!Boot.Choices.Boot.PreDesk" directory to ensure that it
                    is always loaded. The file of dynamic areas is read by
                    the Virtualise module each time it is loaded. Hence once
                    the use of virtual memory has been configured, it is not
                    necessary to use the "!Virtualis" front-end.

    Select all      This selects all of the dynamic areas.
    
    Clear selection This deselects any areas which are selected.


TASK SWAPPER WINDOW

The task swapper window is opened by selecting the "Tasks..." option from the
icon-bar menu.

The window which is opened lists the names of the WIMP tasks running within
the computer. The columns of details are:

    Task            The name of the task, as displayed in the TaskManager
                    window.
                    
    Size            The size of the task, either in memory or on disc. For
                    active tasks this is the same as the figure displayed by
                    the TaskManager.

    Disc            An indicator of whether the task has been swapped to
                    disc.

Clicking on a task within the window attempts to suspend the task, and swap
it to disc. Clicking on a suspended task attempts to reload it and resume
execution. If ADJUST is used, instead of SELECT, then the window is also
closed.

When a task is suspened, any open windows belonging to the task are closed,
    
                    When this option is selected, the Virtualise module will
                    be placed into the "!Boot.Choices.Boot.PreDesk" directory
                    to ensure that it is always loaded.
    
    When !Virtualis is run
    
                    When this option is selected, any copy of Virtualise in
                    the "!Boot.Choices.Boot.PreDesk" directory will be
                    deleted. The module will then only be loaded when the
                    !Virtualis front-end is run.

The final section of the scrollable area entitled "Iconbar clicks" allows
actions to be assigned to SELECT and ADJUST clicks on the iconbar icon. The
options are the same as those available from the iconbar icon menu.


PAGE FAULTS WINDOW

The "Number of page faults" window is opened by selecting the
"Page faults..." option from the icon-bar menu. The window displays the
numbers of virtual memory page faults which were generated by different
classes of instruction since the module was loaded.

Note that page faults generated by floating point processor instructions will
only be listed under "Coprocessor data transfer" if a real floating point
unit is being used. If Acorn's Floating Point Emulator is being used then it
will be an instruction within the emulator code which actually generates the
exception.


AUTOMATIC VIRTUAL MEMORY WINDOW

The automatic virtual memory list window is opened by selecting the
"Automatic..." option from the icon-bar menu.

The window which is opened lists the names of the dynamic areas for which
virtual memory will be enabled by default. This operates by setting system
variables as described in the "Module" file. This list is updated once per
second on WIMP null-polls. The columns of details are:

    Name            The name of the dynamic area as displayed by the
                    TaskManager or returned by OS_DynamicArea 2. If a
                    system variable corresponding to an unknown dynamic
                    area then the capitalisation and special characters
                    may not be exactly the same as the actual dynamic area
                    name.

    Size limit      The maximum size (reserved logical address space) that
                    should be allocated for the dynamic area if no limit is
                    specified by the program that creates it.

Dynamic area names may be selected by clicking with SELECT and ADJUST in the
usual manner. Clicking Menu opens a menu that allows various operations to be
performed. The options offered are:

    Size limit
    
    Add area        The sub-menu lists all the names of dynamic areas that
                    have been seen by the "!Virtualis" front-end. Select
                    the name of a dynamic area to add it to the list. It is
                    initially added with a size limit of 256MB. The list of
                    known dynamic areas is saved betweed sessions.
    
    Remove area     Remove the selected dynamic area names from the list.
                    This also unsets the corresponding system variables.
    
    Save            Save a list of the current settings.  This option also
                    copies the Virtualise module into the
                    "!Boot.Choices.Boot.PreDesk" directory to ensure that it
                    is always loaded. The file of dynamic areas is read by
                    the Virtualise module each time it is loaded. Hence once
                    the use of virtual memory has been configured, it is not
                    necessary to use the "!Virtualis" front-end.

    Select all      This selects all of the dynamic areas.
    
    Clear selection This deselects any areas which are selected.


TASK SWAPPER WINDOW

The task swapper window is opened by selecting the "Tasks..." option from the
icon-bar menu.

The window which is opened lists the names of the WIMP tasks running within
the computer. The columns of details are:

    Task            The name of the task, as displayed in the TaskManager
                    window.
                    
    Size            The size of the task, either in memory or on disc. For
                    active tasks this is the same as the figure displayed by
                    the TaskManager.

    Disc            An indicator of whether the task has been swapped to
                    disc.

Clicking on a task within the window attempts to suspend the task, and swap
it to disc. Clicking on a suspended task attempts to reload it and resume
execution. If ADJUST is used, instead of SELECT, then the window is also
closed.

When a task is suspened, any open windows belonging to the task are closed,
and any icons on the icon-bar are replaced. The task may be resumed by
clicking on any of the replacement icon-bar icons.

If it is not possible to restore a task, for example if there is insufficient
memory, then an error is displayed. This offers the following options:

    Cancel          Close the error window, and leave the task suspended.
    
    Kill Task       Stop the task immediately. This does not exit the task
                    normally, so should only be used as a last resort.

If an attempt is made to exit the desktop while a task is swapped out, an
error dialogue is displayed, and the following options are offered:

    Restore         Attempt to swap the task back. The shutdown is aborted.

    Abort           Abandon the shutdown, and leave the task suspended.
    
    Shutdown        Kill the task, and resume the shutdown. The task is not
                    exited normally, so this should only be used as a last
                    resort.

Not all tasks can be safely swapped out - if in doubt, save any important
data (in all applications) before trying to suspend the task. Programs with
filters applied are likely to cause problems.
