File        : tutorial.txt
Date        : 14-Dec-99
Author      : © A.Thoukydides, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2016
Description : A simple introduction to some of the more useful features of
              the WIMP front-end.

License     : Virtualise is free software: you can redistribute it and/or
              modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
              published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of
              the License, or (at your option) any later version.

              Virtualise is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
              but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
              MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the
              GNU General Public License for more details.

              You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
              along with Virtualise. If not, see<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.


INTRODUCTION

This file provides a relatively straightforward introduction to using the
Virtualise system to provide virtual memory for existing applications. A
reference guide to all aspects of the program are included in the
"frontend.txt" file.

It is assumed that you know how to use the mouse and windows environment on
your RiscPC computer. If this is not the case then please read the Welcome
guide which came with your computer before continuing.


INSTALLING SYSTEM RESOURCES
    
Before the program will run it is necessary to merge the supplied !System
folder with the one on your RiscPC's hard disc. The following steps should be
performed to achieve this. Double-click SELECT on the "!Boot" icon in the
root directory of your hard disc. This will open the "Configuration" window.
Clicking SELECT on the "System" icon will then open another window. Drag the
!System directory from the installation disc to this new window. After a few
seconds of disc activity the update should be complete.


STARTING THE FRONT-END

The front-end supports interactive help; use Acorn's !Help to obtain
information about the item under the mouse pointer. After a brief delay the
title window will open (showing the software version number and your
registration details) and the application icon will appear on the icon-bar.


CONFIGURING THE VIRTUAL MEMORY

Click ADJUST on the !Virtualis icon on the icon-bar. This will open the
"Virtualise configuration window". The most important settings are the
three numbers at the top of the window which control memory usage of the
virtual memory system:

    Claim up to     The amount of real memory to use. Larger values (up to
                    the total memory in the computer) speed up most programs
                    that use virtual memory by reducing the number of disc
                    accesses required.
    
    Leave free      The minimum amount of memory to leave free. When memory
                    is required for another task the virtual memory system
                    will attempt to change its usage to ensure that the
                    specified amount is left unused.
    
    Size limit      Many programs do not specify a maximum size for dynamic
                    areas they create. In such cases the operating system
                    normally sets the maximum size to be the same as the
                    amount of memory in the computer. If virtual memory is
                    going to be used this becomes very restrictive since the
                    maximum size can not be extended after the area has been
                    created. This option allows a different maximum size of
                    be used.
                    
Note that these values can only be specified to the nearest 0.1MB. The other
options within the window are described in the "FrontEnd" file.

To ensure that these values are used the next time !Virtualis is started
click SELECT on the "Save icon" at the bottom of the window. Then click
SELECT on the "Set new" icon at the bottom of the window to use the values
shown.


ENABLING VIRTUAL MEMORY FOR AN APPLICATION

Click SELECT on the !Virtualis icon to open a window listing all of the
dynamic areas in the computer. There is quite a lot of information in the
window, but for now only the names of the dynamic areas down the left-hand
side are important. All of the values are explained in the "FrontEnd" file.
Click on the toggle size icon in the top-right-hand corner to expand the
window to its full size.

Next load (in the usual way) the application which you wish to use virtual
memory with, e.g. !ChangeFSI which is supplied with the computer. Find the
entries for the dynamic areas created by the application you have started,
and select them by clicking SELECT on the first one, and ADJUST for each
subsequent dynamic area.

If you are using !ChangeFSI then the relevant areas are only created when a
file is loaded. Drag a file to the !ChangeFSI icon, and after the window has
opened there will be a "ChangeFSI sprite" dynamic area created.

When all of the required dynamic areas have been selected click MENU within
the window. From the menu that appears select the "Virtualise" option to
enable virtual memory. If an error box is produced then it may not be
possible to enable virtual memory for one or more of the selected areas. If
all goes well, a tick will appear in the right-hand column of the table for
the selcted areas.

That is all that is required to use virtual memory. However, for some
applications it is even easier; see the "Products" file for more details.


MODIFYING AN APPLICATION TO USE VIRTUAL MEMORY BY DEFAULT

To remove the need to enable virtual memory for an application by hand every
time it is used it is possible to modify the application to use virtual
memory automatically. A backup copy should be made of the application before
doing this.

Ensure that the required dynamic areas are selected within the list window,
and drag the application to modify from its directory viewer into the list
window. This will open the "Modify application" window. Click on "Enable
virtual memory by default" and adjust the "Size limit" to the required
maximum dynamic area size. Finally click on OK to perform the modify the
application. The change will take effect the next time the application is
run.

Note that modifying an application also installs the module into the
computer's boot sequence so that it is loaded every time the computer is
started or reset.

To remove the modification drag the application icon into the list window
again, and select the "Restore original !Run file option". This will only
take effect after the computer has next been reset. It is also possible to
choose whether the module should be removed from the boot sequence by
selecting the "Uninstall module option".


QUITTING THE FRONT-END

When it is no longer required the front-end can be quit by selecting the
"Quit" option from the icon-bar menu. This does not affect the module which
provides the virtual memory, so it is safe to do this even if virtual memory
is being used by another application.


OTHER FEATURES

This tutorial has only skimmed the surface of what the Virtualise system can
do. For more details read the relevant sections of the documentation, e.g.
"frontend.txt" for an explanation of the other features offered by the
front-end, or "module.txt" for more technical details about the Virtualise
module itself.
